Causality and interoperability documentation (#5795)
digital-asset/daml: docs/source/concepts/local-ledger.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2020 The DAML Authors. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. _local-ledger:

Local Ledgers and Causality
###########################

A local ledger represents the view on a DAML ledger that a Participant Node maintains for a party.
Parties access this view via the :ref:`Ledger API <ledger-api-services>`.
This document introduces the concept of a :ref:`local ledger <local-ledger-structure>`
and how it relates to the :ref:`Ledger API <ledger-api-services>` and the :ref:`DAML Ledger Model <da-ledgers>`.

The current version covers the following Ledger API services:

* :ref:`Transaction Service <transaction-service>`
* :ref:`Active Contract Service <active-contract-service>`

It does not yet cover :ref:`submission services <ledger-api-submission-services>`,
:ref:`utility services <ledger-api-utility-services>`,
nor :ref:`testing services <ledger-api-testing-services>`.

Local ledgers capture causality between transactions from a party's perspective
rather than a global ledger perspective, taking the party's limited view on the ledger into account.
When a Participant Node outputs transactions and events to a party,

> it respects the causality constraints in the party's view, but it is to ignore causality constraints that are not encoded the DAML models.

Author: Yes. I wanted to write `it is free to ignore`

The action order is a partial order on the actions in a directed acyclic graph of transactions.
Moreover, whenever `act`:sub:`1` is action-ordered before another action `act`:sub:`2` in a directed acyclic graph of transactions,
then the graph contains a (possibly empty) path from `act`:sub:`1`\ 's transaction to `act`:sub:`2`\ 's transaction.

Definition »local ledger«
  A **local ledger** for a party `A` is a finite directed acyclic graph that satisfies the following conditions:

  * *Total order on contract changes:*
    For every contract that `A` is a stakeholder of, the action order totally orders all activations and deactivations of the contract.
    In this sequence, activations alternate with deactivations, starting with an activation.

  * *Total order on key changes:*
    For every key that `A` is a maintainer of, the action order totally orders all allocations and deallocations of the key.
    In this sequence, allocations alternate with deallocations, starting with an allocation, and allocation-deallocations pairs refer to the same contract.

  * *Use ordering:*

>     If `A` is a stakeholder of a contract and an informee of an action `act`:sub:`u` that uses the contract,

Author: No. In the last PR, we agreed that we do not want to totally order all uses of a contract. Accordingly, I cannot require a total order on all "known uses" of a contract, because the additional ordering between uses would induce additional ordering between transactions and thus strengthen causality. Corda does not provide any ordering guarantees between different uses of a contract.

I don't exactly know what you mean with "known usage". If `A` is an observer, it may witness a use action of a contract (e.g., a fetch) even though it is not an informee of the use action. In that case, this witnessed use must not induce an order between actions or transactions for `A`.

>     If `A` is a stakeholder of a contract and an informee of an action `act`:sub:`u` that uses the contract,

Reviewer: Oh, indeed, my bad.

    then `act`:sub:`u` must be ordered after an activation action of the contract.
    Let `act`:sub:`a` be the last activation action of the contract before `act`:sub:`u`.
    Then there must not be a deactivation action `act`:sub:`d` that is ordered after `act`:sub:`a` and before `act`:sub:`u`.
    

>     If an action `act`:sub:`u` uses a key that `A` contains a maintainer of

Author: Like for contract uses, I don't think we want a total order on `NoSuchKey` actions.

>     If an action `act`:sub:`u` uses a key that `A` contains a maintainer of

Reviewer: Yep, same here, I misinterpreted what you definition actually meant. Visualisations would help :)

#. Whenever the local ledger causally orders two transactions, they appear in the same order on the streams.

Similarly, the active contract service provides the set of contracts that are active at the returned offset according to the Transaction Service streams.
That is, the effects of all events from the transaction event stream are taken into account in the provided set of contracts.
In particular, an application can process all subsequent events from the flat transaction stream or the transaction tree stream without having to take events before the snapshot into account.

A deployed DAML ledger ensures that all the local ledgers of its Participant Nodes are consistent, subject to the ledger's trust assumptions.
Here, we consider only a single DAML ledger.
The general case of :ref:`several interoperable DAML ledgers <interoperable-ledgers>` is discussed :ref:`elsewhere <interoperable-causality>`.
Consistency can be expressed by embedding all the local ledgers into a single graph of transactions, the shared ledger.

> A shared ledger satisfies conditions similar to a local ledger, but the conditions do not restrict the orders to a party.

Reviewer 2: If you extract the action order definitions for a single contract and a single key, you can reuse those definitions here. Introducing more terms is a bit sucky, but perhaps they'd also be handy for the integrity statements in Canton (not sure, just a hunch)? Moreover, if we have distributed parties, then you might need to talk about even smaller structures than local ledgers (participant-local? might be in the other doc, I haven't seen it yet), so it might be reusable there.

Definition »shared ledgers«

>   A **shared ledger** is a finite directed acyclic graph that satisfies the following conditions:

Author: Yes, we could skip the `shared ledger` and directly go for the virtual shared ledger pretty much as you suggested.

I mainly included this because the reviewers on the previous draft criticized that I introduce a total order on the shared ledger: such a total order may create wrong expectations at the reader as some ledger implementations do not physically implement such a total order (e.g., Corda).

  * *Total order on key changes:*
    For every key, the action order totally orders all allocations and deallocations of the key.
    In this sequence, allocations alternate with deallocations, starting with an allocation, and allocation-deallocations pairs refer to the same contract.

  * *Use ordering:*
    If an action `act`:sub:`u` uses a contract,
    then `act`:sub:`u` must be ordered after an activation action of the contract.
    Let `act`:sub:`a` be the last activation action of the contract before `act`:sub:`u`.
    Then there must not be a deactivation action `act`:sub:`d` that is ordered after `act`:sub:`a` and before `act`:sub:`u`.
    
    If an action `act`:sub:`u` uses a key
    and there is a key allocation action `act`:sub:`a` ordered before `act`:sub:`u`,
    then there is a deallocation action `act`:sub:`d` for the key ordered after `act`:sub:`a` and before `act`:sub:`u`.

Definition »order consistency«
  A set `Ls` of local ledgers is **order-consistent** for a single DAML Ledger
  if there exists a shared ledger `G` with the following properties:

  * Whenever `Ls` contains a local ledger `L` for party `A`,

>     the vertices of `L` are exactly the vertices of `G` projected to `A` unless the projection is empty.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    for every vertex `v` of `G`, `L` contains the projection of `v` to `A` unless the projection is empty, and `L` contains no other vertices.
```

    (This takes multiplicities into account, i.e., if the projections of two vertices in `G` are the same,
    `L` contains two vertices with the same transactions and it is fixed which vertex in `L` belongs to which vertex in `G`.)
    Moreover, whenever `L` contains an edge between two vertices, `G` contains an edge between the corresponding vertices in `G`.

> Order consistency between local ledgers ensures that the order of transactions is *consistent* across several Participant Nodes and between parties.

Reviewer 2: Since we have a completely different notion of consistency in the ledger model, I'd suggest "order coherency" here, to avoid confusion.

such that this shared ledger is :ref:`valid <da-model-validity>` in the sense of the Ledger Model.
(Note that ledger validity does not depend on the particular topological sort that is chosen.)
In particular, all transactions on the shared ledger are well-authorized and conform to the DAML model.
And so are all transactions on the :ref:`Transaction Service <transaction-service>`
as they are projections of the transactions on the shared ledger.

Transferring consistency to the local ledgers and the transaction stream is trickier as consistency depends on the order of the transactions.
Not all DAML ledgers enforce the same order at all Participant Nodes because this incurs synchronization, which hinders scalability.
Participant Nodes are therefore allowed to output events in different orders if these events do not causally depend on each other from the party's perspective.
Causality is implicitly defined by the conditions for a local ledger.
The examples in the next section will bring these conditions to life.

These reorderings need not happen on any particular DAML ledger, though.
In a :ref:`fully centralized DAML ledger <fully-centralized-ledger>`,

> there is by definition only one system that contains a physical copy of the entire shared ledger.

Reviewer: Yes, but that ordering may be entirely coincidental, e.g. dependent on the order in which the storage backend returns database rows.

   this delay might last forever and liveness is lost.
   Causality therefore does not capture data flow through applications.
   
#. *Divulged actions do not induce causal order.*

   The painter witnesses the fetching of Alice's `Iou` when the `ShowIou` contract is archived.
   The painter also witnesses archival of the `Iou` when Alice exercises the transfer choice as a consequence of the painter accepting the `CounterOffer`.
   However, the *use ordering* rule does not apply as the painter is not a stakeholder of the `Iou`.
   
   Consider a setup where two Participant Nodes `N`:sub:`1` and `N`:sub:`2` host the painter.
   He sees the divulged `Iou` and the created `CounterOffer` through `N`:sub:`1`\ 's transaction tree stream
   and then submits the acceptance through `N`:sub:`1`.
   As in the previous example, `N`:sub:`2` does not know about the dependence of the two commits.
   Therefore, the painter's local ledgers on `N`:sub:`2` need not order the two transactions.
   Accordingly, `N`:sub:`2` may output the accepting transaction *before* the `ShowIou` contract on the transaction stream.
      

>    Even though this may seem unexpected, it is in line with stakeholder-based ledgers:

Reviewer 2: "stakeholder-based ledger" seems a remnant from the old version?

   Since the painter is not a stakeholder of the `Iou` contract, he should not care about the archivals or creates of the contract.
   In fact, the divulged `Iou` contract does not show up in the painter's active contract service or in the flat transaction stream.
   Such witnessed events are included in the transaction tree stream as a convenience:
   They relieve the painter from computing the consequences of the choice and enable him to check that the action conforms to the model.

   By a similar argument, being an actor of an **Exercise** action induces causal order with respect to other uses of the contract only if the actor is a contract stakeholder.

>    This is because non-stakeholder actors of an **Exercise** action authorize the action, but they have no say in whether the contract is active; this is the signatories' job.

Reviewer 2: This seems very Canton-specific.

   
#. *Causality depends on the party.*

   By the previous example, for the painter, fetching the `Iou` is not causally ordered before transferring the `Iou`.
   For Alice, however, the **Fetch** is causally ordered before the **Exercise** by the *use ordering* rule
   because Alice is a stakeholder on the `Iou` contract.
   This shows that causal ordering depends on the party.

>    Even if both Alice and the painter are hosted on the same Participant Node,

Reviewer 2: AFAIK this is not possible in any of our current implementations. Perhaps Corda? Why would we want/need to weaken this guarantee?
